An Essential Instruction on Refuge and Bodhicitta

by Patrul Rinpoche

In the Buddha, the Dharma and the Supreme AssemblyI take refuge until I attain enlightenment.Through
the merit of practising generosity and so on,May I attain buddhahood for the benefit
of all beings.

Here I shall explain taking refuge, which is the foundation of the path toliberation, the basis
of all vows, the source of all enlightened qualities andthe point of differentiation between
buddhists and non-buddhists, togetherwith generating the mind of bodhicitta, which
is the foundation foraccomplishing the level of complete enlightenment and the source of all
thatis positive in existence and peace.

1. Taking Refuge

This has three sections: (i) the objects in which we take refuge, (ii) theduration of refuge
and (iii) the actual practice of taking refuge.

i. The Objects of Refuge

There are three objects: the perfect Buddha who is the unsurpassable teacher,the sacred Dharma
which is the unsurpassable protection and the supremeassembly of the noble sangha, who
are the unsurpassable guides.

Buddha

The Buddha is the one endowed with the four kāyas and five wisdoms.

The four kāyas are:

The svābhāvikakāya, which is the nature of phenomenal reality devoid of any obscurations.The
dharmakāya, which is the unceasing aspect of wisdom.The sambhogakāya, which is the self-appearing
rūpakāya adorned with major and minor marks.The nirmāṇakāya, which appears in order
to tame disciples who are to be tamed.

The five wisdoms are:

The wisdom of dharmadhātu, which is the inherent purity of absolute space.The mirror-like wisdom,
which is wisdom’s unceasing clarity aspect.The equalizing wisdom, which is the absence
of attachment and aversion towards anyone or anything, near or far.The wisdom of discernment,
which knows objects without confusing or conflating them.The all-accomplishing wisdom,
which effortlessly brings about the welfare of others.

Dharma

The Dharma is identified as scripture and realization.

The Dharma of scripture consists of the three collections (piṭakas):

The Vinaya collection, which tames ('dul ba) the disturbing emotions in one’s mindstream.The
Sūtra collection of summarizing (mdo) texts in which points are arranged in categories.The
Abhidharma collection for generating the wisdom that clearly (mngon par) realizes the way
things are.

The Dharma of realization is the threefold higher training:

The training in higher discipline, which is the subject matter of the vinaya collection.The
training in higher meditation, which is the subject matter of the sūtra collection.The training
in higher wisdom, which is the subject matter of the abhidharma collection.

The two truths [of cessation and the path] come from taking these threetrainings into one’s
experience, as abandonment and realization develop on thefive paths and ten bhūmis. The truth
of cessation is the perfect abandonmentand the truth of the path is the perfect realization.

Sangha

The sangha is the irreversible sangha of bodhisattvas. These are thebodhisattvas on the ten
bhūmis, who can not revert to saṃsāra, because theyhave realized emptiness directly through
their wisdom, and who do not fallinto the extreme of quiescence, because in their compassion
they care forbeings with the love of a mother for her only child.

ii. The Duration of Taking Refuge

The verse says “…until I attain enlightenment.” In this context, the mahāyānalevel of taking
refuge is distinguished by three features.

Difference in terms of Objects

The followers of the hīnayāna take as their refuge the supreme nirmāṇakāyaŚākyamuni, who is
“The Buddha, the supreme of all humans (literally ‘those ontwo legs’).” They do not accept
the dharmakāya and sambhogakāya, and theybelieve that even the nirmāṇakāya stops benefitting
beings once it has passedbeyond this world. They believe that the Dharma jewel refers
only to the stateof nirvāṇa, which is the truth of cessation. They refer to this as “peace
andsupreme freedom from passions.” For them, the “sangha, which is the supreme ofall assemblies”
consists of the noble śrāvakas and pratyekabuddhas, thestream-enterers, once-returners,
non-returners and arhats.

In the mahāyāna, on the other hand, it is as I have explained above.

Difference in terms of Duration

The followers of the hīnayāna take refuge temporarily for as long as theylive, and ultimately
until they attain their own particular fruition.

Difference in terms of Attitude

The followers of the hīnayāna take refuge with an attitude of renunciation,wishing to find freedom
from all the sufferings of saṃsāra for themselvesalone. The followers of the mahāyāna
take refuge with bodhicitta, in the wishthat all sentient beings might attain buddhahood.

iii. The Actual Practice of Taking Refuge

When taking refuge with the words “I take refuge…” and so on, consider that inevery atom appear
buddhas as numerous as all the atoms in existence, eachsurrounded by an assembly of their
bodhisattva heirs, reaching to the verylimits of phenomenal reality. Consider that the
enlightened minds of all thesevictorious buddhas and their bodhisattva sons and daughters
are filled withthe sacred Dharma of scripture and realization, and they all remain before
youas great leaders, ready to care for and guide you and all sentient beings withtheir vast
qualities of wisdom, love and power. As you remain before them,together with all other
sentient beings, all clasping your palms together, youthink the following, “From this moment
on, until the essence of enlightenmentis reached, we rely on you, Three Jewels, as our
objects of refuge. We makeofferings to you. You are our only practice. We have no other refuge
or hopebut you.” Then with total trust and heartfelt conviction, take refuge.

The Precepts of Taking Refuge

In this, there are six specific precepts and five general ones.

Six Specific Precepts

In the specific precepts, there are three things to avoid and three things to
do.

Three Things to Avoid

Having taken refuge in the Buddha, you should not worship any gods who are still bound within
the cycle of saṃsāra.Having taken refuge in the Dharma, you should not inflict harm upon
any sentient being.Having taken refuge in the Saṅgha, you should not associate with friends
who hold extreme views.

Three Things to Do

Practise according to the words of the Buddha and then, without forgetting them, generate faith
and devotion. Show respect even for broken fragments of statues and images of the Buddha.Exert
yourself in studying, reflecting and meditating on the sacred Dharma. Show respect
even for torn scriptures that represent the Dharma.Respect the saṅgha who are followers
of the Buddha, associate with virtuous friends, and treat even tiny pieces of yellow cloth
as objects worthy of reverence.

Five General Precepts

Do not forsake the Three Jewels, even at the cost of your life.Even in important ventures, do
not seek other methods.Do not interrupt your regular practice.Encourage yourself and others
to take refuge.Pay homage to the buddha of whichever direction you travel.

2. Generating Bodhicitta

Generally there are said to be two levels to bodhicitta, the relative and theultimate. Relative
bodhicitta is the mind that is intent upon attainingperfect enlightenment for the sake
of others, and ultimate bodhicitta is thewisdom that directly realizes emptiness.

Relative bodhicitta itself can be further divided into aspirationalbodhicitta, which is like
the wish to go somewhere, and the bodhicitta ofapplication, which is like actually making
the journey. In both cases,bodhicitta is generated through formal practice, and so it is
known as‘coarse bodhicitta arising from signs’.

Ultimate bodhicitta only arises through the power of meditating on the path,and is therefore
known as ‘subtle bodhicitta, which is gained through realityitself’.

Relative bodhicitta has two points or aspects: compassion, which is focusedon sentient beings,
and wisdom, which is directed towards perfectenlightenment. If either of these two aspects
is lacking, then it will not bethe bodhicitta of the Mahāyāna, so it is important that
they are bothcomplete.

Here in the present context, the generation of aspirational bodhicitta alonehas two aspects:
focusing on merit which is the cause and aspiring towardsperfect enlightenment which is the
result.

The first of these is covered in the phrase “practising generosity and so on.”When all sources
of virtue are categorized, they may be included within whatare called ‘the three bases
for creating merit’. These are the creation ofmerit through generosity, the creation of merit
through discipline and thecreation of merit through meditation. When we relate these to
the sixpāramitās, the first two relate to the pāramitās of the same name, and thecreation
of merit through meditation relates to patience, concentration andwisdom. Diligence assists
them all.

These six pāramitās are also based on specific states of mind:

Generosity is an attitude of giving.Discipline is an attitude of renunciation.Patience is an
attitude of imperturbability.Diligence is an attitude of enthusiasm.Concentration is non-distraction.Wisdom
is the precise discernment of phenomena.

The second aspect of aspiring towards the result of perfect enlightenment iscovered in the phrase,
“May I attain buddhahood for the benefit of allbeings.” This is the actual bodhicitta
endowed with the two points oraspects. “For the benefit of all beings” is the thought of
who we arepractising for, and is focusing on sentient beings with compassion. “May Iattain
buddhahood” is longing for what we are practising towards, and iswisdom directed towards
complete enlightenment. It is therefore theaspirational bodhicitta, which is to think, “Through
all these sources ofvirtue of mine, may I attain buddhahood for the benefit of all
sentient beingswho are as infinite as space!”

The Precepts of Aspirational Bodhicitta

In addition, there are the five precepts of aspirational bodhicitta, whichare as follows:

Never giving up on sentient beings.Continually reflecting on the benefits of bodhicitta.Exerting
yourself in the methods for accumulating merit and wisdom.Applying yourself to the training
in bodhicitta.Adopting and abandoning the eight wholesome and unwholesome dharmas.

Giving up on just a single sentient being causes you to lose your bodhicittaof aspiration completely,
so develop a wish to benefit all beings.

Reflecting on its benefits causes you to develop enthusiasm and apply yourselfto arousing bodhicitta,
so reflect continually on the benefits to be gainedfrom the generation of bodhicitta.

Gathering the accumulations increases the strength of your bodhicitta, soaccumulate merit and
wisdom in various ways, such as the seven branchpractice.

The training in bodhicitta has three elements:

training in the cause by meditating on the four immeasurables,the actual training, which is
to practise taking the vow of bodhicitta three times during the day and three times at night,and
the training in the precepts, the meditations on equalizing and exchanging yourself
and others, and consider others as more important than yourself.

The four immeasurables are as follows:

Love, which is the wish that all beings who are unhappy may find happiness.Compassion, which
is the wish that all who are suffering may be freed from suffering.Sympathetic joy, which
is the wish that those who are happy and free from suffering may never be separated from
their happiness.Equanimity, which is the wish that those who feel attachment and aversion
towards anyone, close or distant, may pacify their attachment and aversion.

The actual training in bodhicitta is to take the vow of bodhicitta by meansof any formal practice—whether
elaborate, medium or short—at the six times ofthe day and night, i.e., at dawn,
mid-morning, midday, afternoon, dusk andmidnight.

‘Equalizing self and others’ means recognizing the equality of yourself and others in wishing
to find happiness and wishing to avoid suffering.‘Exchanging self and others’ means giving
your own happiness to other sentient beings, and taking their suffering upon yourself.‘Considering
others as more important than yourself’ means setting aside your own benefit and
accomplishing the benefit of others.

The eight wholesome and unwholesome dharmas consist of four wholesome dharmasto be adopted and
four unwholesome dharmas to be abandoned.

The four unwholesome dharmas are as follows:

Deceiving anyone worthy of veneration.Feeling misplaced regret.Abusing a holy person.Cheating
others.

The four wholesome dharmas are as follows:

Being careful never to lie, even at the cost of your life.Setting everyone on the path to enlightenment.Showing
similar respect to bodhisattvas as you would to the Buddha.Being honest
to all beings.

If you apply yourself to these practices, then you will never forget the mindof bodhicitta in
all your future lives, and all the qualities of the bhūmisand paths will develop and increase
like the waxing moon.

Virtue!

| Translated by Adam Pearcey, 2004.